Now, my co-mates andbrothers in exile,
hath not old custom madethis life more sweet
than that of painted pomp?
Are not these woods morefree from peril
than the envious court?
Here feel we but thepenalty of Adam,
the seasons' difference,
as the icy fang andchurlish chiding of thewinter's wind,
which, when it bites andblows upon my body,
even till I shrink withcold,
I smile and say, "This isno flattery.
"These are counsellors
that feelingly persuade mewhat I am."
Sweet are the uses ofadversity,
which, like the toad, uglyand venomous,
wears yet a precious jewelin his head,
and this our life exemptfrom public haunt
finds tongues in trees,
books in the runningbrooks,
sermons in stones,
and good in every thing.
I would not change it.
Happy is your Grace
that can translate thestubbornness of fortune
into so quiet and so sweeta style.
Come, shall we go and killus venison?
And yet it irks me thepoor dappled fools,
being native burghers ofthis desert city,
should in their ownconfines with the forkedheads
have their round haunchesgored.
Indeed, my lord,
the melancholy Jaquesgrieves at that,
and in that kind
swears you do more usurp
than doth your brotherthat hath banish'd you.
Today, my Lord of Amiensand myself
did steal behind him as helay along
under an oak whose antiqueroot peeps out
upon the brook that brawlsalong this wood,
to the which place a poorsequester'd stag
that from the hunter's aimhad ta'en a hurt
did come to languish,
and indeed, my lord,
the wretched animal heavedforth such groans
that their discharge didstretch his leathern coatalmost to bursting,
and the big round tears
coursed one another downhis innocent nose
in piteous chase;
and thus, the hairy fool
much marked of themelancholy Jaques,
stood on the extremestverge of the swift brook,
augmenting it with tears.
But what said Jaques?
Did he not moralize thisspectacle?
O, yes, into a thousandsimiles:
first, for his weepinginto the needless stream,
"Poor deer," quoth he,
"thou makest a testamentas worldlings do,
giving thy sum of more tothat which had too much";
then, being there alone,
left and abandon'd of hisvelvet friends,
"'Tis right," quoth he,
"thus misery doth part theflux of company"
anon a careless herd fullof the pasture,
jumps along by him andnever stays to greet him;
"Aye," quoth Jaques,"Sweep on, you fat andgreasy citizens;
"'tis just the fashion.
"Wherefore do you look
upon that poor and brokenbankrupt there?"
Thus most invectively,
he pierceth through thebody of the country, city,court,
yea, and of this, ourlife,
swearing that we are mereusurpers, tyrants,
and what's worse,
to fright the animals andto kill them up
in their assign'd andnative dwelling place.
And did you leave him inthis contemplation?
We did, my lord,
weeping and commentingupon the sobbing deer.
Show me the place.
I love to cope him inthese sullen fits,
for then he's full ofmatter.
Can it be possible that noman saw them?
It cannot be.
Some villains of my court
are of consent andsufferance in this.
I cannot hear of any thatdid see her.
The ladies, her attendantsof her chamber, saw herabed,
and in the morning early,
they found the beduntreasured of theirmistress.
My lord, the roynishclown,
at whom so oft your gracewas wont to laugh,
is also missing.
Hisperia, the princess'gentlewoman,
confesses that shesecretly o'erheard
your daughter and hercousin
much commend the parts andgraces of the wrestler
that did but lately foilthe sinewy Charles;
and she believes, whereverthey are gone,
that youth is surely intheir company.
Send to his brother.
Fetch that gallant hither.
I'll make him find him.
Do this expediently!
And let not search andinquisition
quail to bring again thesefoolish runaways.
Who's there?
What? My young master?
O, my gentle master,
your praise is come tooswiftly home before you.
Know you not, master, tosome kind of men
their graces serve thembut as enemies?
No more do yours.
Your virtues, gentlemaster,
are sanctified and holytraitors to you.
O, what a world is this
when what is comelyenvenoms him that bearsit?
Why, what's the matter?
O unhappy youth, come notwithin these doors.
Within this roof, theenemy of all your graceslives.
Your brother--no, nobrother-- yet the son--yetnot the son--
I will not call him son ofhim I was about to callhis father--
hath heard your praises,
and this night,
he means to burn thelodging where you use tolie
and you within it.
If he fail in that,
he hath other means to cutyou off.
I overheard him and hispractises.
This is no place.
This house is but abutchery.
Abhor it; fear it; do notenter it.
Why, whither, Adam,wouldst thou have me go?
No matter whither so youcome not here.
What, wouldst thou have mego and beg my food?
Or with a base andboisterous sword
enforce a thievish livingon the common road?
Oh, but do not so.
I have 500 crowns,
the thrifty hire I savedunder your father,
which I did store to be myfoster nurse
when service should in myold limbs lie lame
and unregarded age incorners thrown.
Take that,
and he that doth theravens feed,
yea, providently catersfor the sparrow,
be comfort to my age.
Here is the gold.
All this I give you.
Let me be your servant.
Though I look old, yet Iam strong and lusty.
I'll do the service of ayounger man
in all your business andnecessities.
O good old man,
how well in thee appears
the constant service ofthe antique world,
when service sweat forduty, not for meed!
But, poor old man,
thou prunest a rotten treethat cannot so much as ablossom
yield in lieu of all thypains and husbandry,
but come thy ways.
We'll go along together.
Master, go on,
and I will follow thee tothe last gasp
with truth and loyalty.
From 17 years till nowalmost fourscore herelived I
but now live here no more.
At 17 years, many theirfortunes seek,
but at fourscore, it istoo late a week.
Yet fortune cannotrecompense me better
than to die well and notmy master's debtor.
O Jupiter, how weary aremy spirits.
I care not for my spiritsif my legs were not weary.
I could find it in myheart to disgrace my man'sapparel
and cry like a woman,
but I must comfort theweaker vessel
as doublet and hose
ought to show itself morecourageous to petticoat.
Therefore courage, goodAliena!
Pray you, bear with me.
I cannot go no further.
For my part,
I'd rather bear with youthan bear you,
yet I should bear no crossif I did bear you,
for I think you have nomoney in your purse.
Well...
this is the forest ofArden.
Aye, now am I in Arden,themore fool I.
When I was at home, I wasin a better place,
but travellers must becontent.
Aye, be so, goodTouchstone.
Look you, who comes here--
a young man and an old insolemn talk.
That is the way to makeher scorn you still.
O Corin, that thou knew'sthow I do love her.
I partly guess, for I haveloved ere now.
No, Corin, being old, thoucanst not guess,
though in thy youth
thou wast as true a lover
as ever sigh'd upon amidnight pillow.
But if your love were everlike to mine--
as sure I think did neverman love so--
how many actions mostridiculous
hast thou been drawn to bythy fantasy?
Into a thousand that Ihave forgotten.
O, thou didst then neverlove so heartily.
If thou remember'st notthe slightest folly
that ever love did makethee run into,
thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not sat asI do now,
wearying thy hearer in thymistress' praise,
thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not brokefrom company abruptly
as my passion now makesme,
thou hast not loved.
O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe!
Alas, poor shepherd.
Searching of thy wound,
I have by hard adventurefound mine own.
And I mine.
I remember, when I was inlove,
I broke my sword upon astone and bid him takethat
for coming a-night to JaneSmile;
and I remember the kissingof her batlet
and the cow's dugs
that her pretty chopp'dhands had milked;
and I remember the wooingof a peascod instead ofher,
from whom I took two codsand, giving her themagain,
said with weeping tears,"Wear these for my sake."
Ah, we that are truelovers run into strangecapers;
but as all is mortal innature,
so is all nature in lovemortal in folly.
Thou speakest wiser thanthou art ware of.
Nay, I shall ne'er be wareof mine own wit
till I break my shinsagainst it.
Oh, Jove, Jove,
this shepherd's passion ismuch after my own fashion.
And mine,
but it grows somethingstale with me.
I pray you,
one of you question yondman
if he for gold will giveus any food.
I faint almost to death.
Holla, you clown!
Peace, fool.
He's not thy kinsman.
Who calls?
Your betters, sir.
Else are they verywretched.
Peace, I say.
Good even to you, friend.
And to you, gentle sir,
and to you all.
I prithee, shepherd,
if that love or gold
could in this desert placebuy entertainment,
bring us where we may restourselves and feed.
Here's a maid with travelmuch oppress'd
and almost faints forsuccor.
Fair sir,
I pity her and wish forher sake more than formine own
mine fortunes were moreable to relieve her,
but I am shepherd toanother man
and do not shear thefleeces that I graze.
My master is of churlishdisposition
and little reaks to findthe way to heaven
by doing deeds ofhospitality.
Besides, his cote, hisflocks, and bounds of feed
are now on sale,
and at our sheepcote now,
by reason of his absence,
there is nothing that youwill feed on;
but what is, come see;
and in my voice, mostwelcome shall you be.
What is he shall buy theflock and pasture?
That young swain that yousaw here but erewhile,
that little cares forbuying any thing.
I pray thee, if it standwith honesty,
buy thou the cottage,pasture, and the flock,
and thou shalt have to payfor it of us.
And we will mend thywages.
I like this place
and willingly could wastemy time in it.
Assuredly, the thing is tobe sold.
Go with me.
If you like upon reportthe soil, the profit,
and this way of life,
I will your very faithfulfeeder be
and buy it with your goldright suddenly.
Under the greenwood tree
who loves to lie with me
and turn his merry note
unto the sweet bird'sthroat.
Come hither, come hither,come hither.
Here shall he see no enemy
but winter and roughweather.
More, more, I prithee,more.
It will make youmelancholy, MonsieurJaques.
I thank it.
More, I prithee, more.
I can suck melancholy outof a song
as a weasel sucks eggs.
More, I prithee, more.
My voice is ragged.
I know I cannot pleaseyou.
I do not desire you toplease me;
I do desire you to sing.
Come, more; anotherstanzo.
Call you 'em stanzos?
What you will, MonsieurJaques.
Nay, I care not for theirnames.
They owe me nothing.
Will you sing?
More at your request thanto please myself.
Well then, if ever I thankany man,
I'll thank you.
Come, sing,
and you that will not,holdyour tongues.
Well, I'll end the song.
Sirs, cover the while.
The duke will drink underthis tree.
He hath been all this dayto look you.
And I have been all thisday to avoid him.
He is too disputable formy company.
I think of as many mattersas he,
but I give heaven thanksand make no boast of them.
Come, warble, come.
Who doth ambition shun
and loves to live i' thesun,
seeking the food he eats
and pleased with what hegets?
Come hither, come hither,come hither.
Here shall he see no enemy
but winter and roughweather.
I'll give you a verse
to this note that I madeyesterday
in despite of myinvention.
And I'll sing it.
Thus it goes:
If it do come to pass
that any man turn ass,
leaving his wealth andease,
a stubborn will toplease--
ducdame, ducdame,ducdame--
there shall he see grossfools as he,
and if he will, come tome.
What's that "ducdame"?
'Tis a Greek invocation tocall fools into a circle.
Oh, I'll go sleep if Ican.
If I cannot,
I'll rail against all thefirst-born of Egypt.
If it do come to pass
that any man turn ass,
leaving his wealth andease,
a stubborn will toplease--
ducdame, ducdame,ducdame--
here shall he see grossfools as he,
and if he will, come tome.
Dear master, I can go nofurther.
O, I die for food.
Here lie I down andmeasure out my grave.
Farewell, kind master.
How now, Adam.
No greater heart in thee?
Live a little; comfort alittle; cheer thyself alittle.
If this uncouth forestyield any thing savage,
I will either be food forit or bring it for food tothee.
For my sake, becomfortable.
Hold death awhile at thearm's end.
I will here be with theepresently,
and if I bring thee notsomething to eat,
I will give thee leave todie.
But if thou diest before Icome, thou art a mocker ofmy labour.
Well said.
Thou lookest cheerly,
and I will be with theequickly.
Yet thou liest in thebleak air.
Come, I will bear thee tosome shelter,
and thou shalt not die forlack of a dinner
if there live any thing inthis desert.
Cheerly, good Adam.
I think he be transform'dinto a beast,
for I can no where findhim like a man.
My lord, he is but evennow gone hence.
Here was he merry, hearingof a song.
If he, compact of jars,grows musical,
we shall have shortlydiscord in the spheres.
How now, monsieur.
What a life is this,
that your poor friendsmust woo your company?
What?
You look merrily.
A fool, a fool.
I met a fool in theforest,
a motley fool.
Oh, a miserable world.
As I do live by food,
I met a fool who laid himdown and bask'd him inthe sun
and rail'd on Lady Fortunein good terms,
in good set terms,
and yet a motley fool.
"Good morrow, fool," quothI.
"No, sir," quoth he.
"Call me not fool tillheaven hath sent mefortune,"
and then he drew a dialfrom his poke,
and, looking on it withlackluster eye,
says very wisely, "It isten o'clock.
Thus we may see," quothhe, "how the world wags.
"'Tis but an hour agosince it was nine,
"and after one hour more'twill be eleven,
"and so from hour to hour,we ripe and ripe,
"and then from hour tohour, we rot and rot,
and thereby hangs a tale."
But when I did hear themotley fool
thus moral on the time,
my lungs began to crowlike chanticleer
that fools should be sodeep-contemplative,
and I did laugh sansintermission
an hour by his dial.
O noble fool.
A worthy fool.
Motley's the only wear.
What fool is this?
A worthy fool, one thathath been a courtier,
and says if ladies be butyoung and fair,
they have the gift toknow it.
And in his brain,
which is as dry as theremainder biscuit
after a voyage,
he hath strange placescramm'd with observation
the which he vents inmangled forms.
O that I were a fool.
I am ambitious for amotley coat.
Thou shalt have one.
It is my only suit,
I must have libertywithal, as large a charteras the wind,
to blow on whom I please,
for so fools have.
Invest me in my motley.
Give me leave to speak mymind,
and I will, through andthrough,
cleanse the foul body ofthe infected world
if they will patientlyreceive my medicine.
Fie on thee.
I can tell thee what thouwouldst do.
What, for a counter, wouldI do but good?
Most mischievous foul sinin chiding sin,
for thou thyself hast beena libertine
as sensual as the brutishsting itself,
and all the embossed soresand headed evils
which thou with licence offree foot hast caught
wouldst thou disgorge intothe general world.
Why, who cries out onpride
that can therein tax anyprivate party?
Doth it not flow as hugelyas the sea
till that the wearer'svery means do ebb?
What woman in the city doI name
when that I say the citywoman bears the cost ofprinces
on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in and saythat I mean her
when such a one as shesuch is her neighbour?
Or what is he of basestfunction
that says his bravery isnot of my cost
thinking that I mean him
but therein suits hisfolly to the mettle of myspeech?
There then;
how then?
What then?
Let me see wherein mytongue hath wrong'd him.
If it do him right, thenhe hath wrong'd himself.
If he be free,
why then my taxing, like awild goose, flies,
unclaim'd of any man.
Forbear, and eat no more!
Why, I have eat none yet.
Nor shalt not tillnecessity be served.
Of what kind should thiscock come of?
Art thou thus bolden'd,man, by thy distress
or else a rude despiser ofgood manners
that in civility thouseem'st so empty?
You touch'd my vein atfirst.
The thorny point of baredistress
hath ta'en from me theshow of smooth civility.
Yet, am I inland bred andknow some nurture.
But forbear, I say.
He dies that touches anyof this fruit
till I and my affairs areanswered.
And you will not beanswered with reason, Imust die.
What wouldst thou have?
Thy gentleness shall force
more than your force moveus to gentleness.
I almost die for food, andlet me have it!
Sit down and feed, andwelcome to our table.
Speak you so gently?
Pardon me, I pray you.
I thought that all thingshad been savage here
and therefore put I on
the countenance of sterncommandment.
But whate'er you are thatin this desert inaccessible
under the shade ofmelancholy boughs
lose and neglect thecreeping hours of time,
if ever you have look'd onbetter days,
if ever been where bellshave knoll'd to church,
if ever sat at any goodman's feast,
if ever from your eyelidswiped a tear
and know what 'tis to pityand be pitied,
let gentleness my strongenforcement be.
In the which hope I blushand hide my sword.
True is it that we haveseen better days,
Ho, ho, ho, ho.
Therefore, sit you down ingentleness
and take upon command whathelp we have
that to your wanting maybe minister'd.
Then but forbear your fooda little while
whiles, like a doe, I goto find my fawn and giveit food.
There is an old poor man
who after me hath many aweary step limp'd in purelove.
Till he be first sufficed,
oppress'd with two weakevils, age and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.
Go find him out,
and we will nothing wastetill you return.
I thank ye,
and be blessed for yourgood comfort.
Thou seest we are not allalone unhappy.
This wide and universaltheater presents morewoeful pageants
than the scene wherein weplay in.
All the world's a stage
and all the men and womenmerely players.
They have their exits andtheir entrances,
and one man in his timeplays many parts,
his acts being seven ages:
at first the infant,
mewling and puking in thenurse's arms;
and then the whiningschoolboy
with his satchel andshining morning face,
creeping like snailunwillingly to school;
and then the lover,sighing like furnace,
with a woeful ballad madeto his mistress' eyebrow;
then a soldier,
full of strange oaths andbearded like the pard,
jealous in honor, suddenand quick in quarrel,
seeking the bubblereputation even in thecannon's mouth;
and then the justice,
in fair round belly withgood capon lined,
with eyes severe and beardof formal cut,
full of wise saws andmodern instances,
and so he plays his part.
The sixth age shifts
into the lean andslipper'd pantaloon,
with spectacles on noseand pouch on side,
his youthful hose,well-saved,
the world too wide for hisshrunk shank,
and his big, manly voice
turning again towardchildish treble,
pipes and whistles in hissound.
Last scene of all
that ends this strange,eventful history,
is second childishness
and mere oblivion,
sans teeth,
sans eyes,
sans taste,
sans everything.
Set down your venerableburden.
And let him feed.
I thank you most for him.
So had you need.
I scarce can speak tothank you for myself.
Welcome; fall to.
I will not trouble you asyet
to question you about yourfortunes.
Give us some music,
and, good cousin, sing.
Blow, blow, thou winterwind.
Thou art not so unkind
as man's ingratitude.
Thy tooth is not so keen
because thou art not seen,
although thy breath berude.
Heigh-ho.
Sing, heigh-ho
unto the green holly.
Most friendship isfeigning.
Most loving, mere folly.
Then, heigh-ho, the holly,
this life is most jolly.
Freeze, freeze, thoubitter sky,
that dost not bite so nigh
as benefits forgot.
Though thou the waterswarp,
thy sting is not so sharp
as friend remember'd not.
Heigh-ho.
Sing, heigh-ho
unto the green holly.
Most friendship isfeigning.
Most loving, mere folly.
Then, heigh-ho, the holly,
this life is most jolly.
If that you were the goodSir Rowland's son
as you have whisper'dfaithfully you were,
and as mine eyes doth hiseffigies witness
most truly limn'd andliving in your face,
be truly welcome hither.
I am the duke that lovedyour father.
Good old man,
thou art right welcome asthy master is.